(DOCSP-9482): Introduction to MongoDB Realm for Mobile Developers (#148)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/get-started/introduction-mobile.txt

===================================================
Introduction to MongoDB Realm for Mobile Developers
===================================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

This introduction explains the MongoDB Realm product at a high level for
developers with experience developing mobile applications. If you have

> significant experience working on the back-end or on web applications,

Reviewer: There is no definitive authority on this but out of preference for fewer hyphens, I've been going with "backend" on my page.

you should consider reading the :doc:`Introduction for Web Developers
</get-started/introduction-web>` or the
:doc:`Introduction for Back-end Developers

> </get-started/introduction-back-end>`.

Reviewer: I understand the intent to use this meta-textual introduction to point people who are in the "wrong" place to the right place, but what does this do for readers who are already in the right place? How can your introduction more effectively capitalize on the precious moments of attention that it already has? Potentially, do away with priming for the page and get right into it.

Author: Hmm, I'm torn on this. On one hand, I really really value an introduction that sets up expectations: who is this doc for? what will I learn from this doc? why should I care?
... but on the other hand, you have a great point, we don't want users to lose interest early on.

I'm thinking that putting this in a note might be a good middle ground, what do you think?

What Problem Does MongoDB Realm Solve?
--------------------------------------

Mobile application development today requires proficiency in a number
of different domains of software development:

- Programming in the languages and frameworks for one or more mobile
  operating systems

> - Gracefully handling the "hostile environment" of mobile, where

Reviewer: I find the phrase "hostile environment" to be loaded, and a bit jarring out of context, like we are jumping into a shared conclusion that has not been established. In Ian's material this is usually presented in context: something like, "Developers are used to working on the happy path, where connections are stable, but as it turns out, mobile development is a hostile environment: ...". Presenting it in context, you could also do away with the scare quotes.

Author: Very good point -- I'll restructure this to ditch the scare quotes and define exactly what a "hostile environment" is (or just avoid using the term entirely, replacing it with the things that actually make mobile hostile)

  connections can be lost, devices can shutdown at any time, and clients
  usually update with a significant delay after release, if at all

- Coordination between mobile clients, back-end APIs, and databases to
  maintain a common schema of objects and endpoints with which to
  communicate

- Mindfulness of security vulnerabilities across all components in an
  ecosystem, from the HTTP protocol to API endpoints to data stored on
  the client

- Consistent serialization of objects between networks,

>   database storage, and application memory

Reviewer: I would personally punctuate the end of each of these with periods. You could also avoid leading with gerunds in this list by re-centering the subject on "you":

>If you want to be a mobile developer: you must gracefully handle errors, coordinate between, be mindful of, ..."

Note we dislike gerunds (nouns made by -ingifying verbs) because they obfuscate the subject and make the sentence less direct and clear.

Author: Yeah, I flipflopped a lot on the structure of these bullets. I actually like the form they're in now (transformed from all gerunds before for exactly the reason you state here) but agree that the sentence introducing them could use some work.

My only reservation is that I don't want to structure this as a "if you want to be a REAL mobile developer" no-true-Scotsman situation, so i'll have to handle making it you-centric carefully.

Reviewer: There are ways that center you without the judgment: "When developing a mobile app, you have to handle..." "You have to be aware of..."

  data with MongoDB Realm over the network in a background thread,
  pushing local data changes to MongoDB Realm and pulling remote changes
  down. The :term:`sync protocol` ensures that conflicts are resolved
  consistently on each client and in the
  :term:`linked MongoDB Atlas cluster <linked cluster>`.

- **Local storage**: Realm Database stores data as objects using the native
  query language for each platform, to make storing, accessing, and
  updating your data simple.

- **Reactive UI**:
  :term:`Live objects <live objects>` always reflect the latest data
  stored in Realm Database and allow you to subscribe to changes, so
  you can keep your UI up-to-date at all times.

MongoDB Atlas
-------------

Client applications generate a lot of data. Whether it's uploaded photos
and files, posts and comments on a blog, or inventory volumes in a
kitchen, you need to store that data somewhere. MongoDB Atlas provides
cloud-hosted managed instances of MongoDB that are always available. And
because it's MongoDB, it's flexible and supports a wide range of
languages for your back-end number-crunching services.

MongoDB Realm
-------------

> MongoDB Realm stitches together Realm Database and MongoDB Atlas in a

Reviewer: >stitches

Nice... 😎

===================================================
Introduction to MongoDB Realm for Mobile Developers
===================================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

This introduction explains the MongoDB Realm product at a high level for

> developers with experience developing mobile applications. After

Reviewer 2: Not explicitly opposed to it - but isn't a "what you should learn in this document" paragraph more often used in dense technical content? I don't know if it makes a ton of sense on an intro page.

reading, you should understand what MongoDB Realm is, how it interacts
with Realm Database, and which benefits it offers compared to
traditional mobile development stacks.

.. note::

>    If you have significant experience working on the backend or on web

Reviewer 2: Since significant is an undefined term, does the word need to be here?

If the message is something along the lines of 'if you prefer working on the backend or web, use these other guides' maybe we can rephrase this to be more clear. Right now it somewhat sounds like we're saying "if you have a lot of skill w/ backend or web use those guides, but if you don't have a lot of skill with those, use this guide", which I (think) is not the message we want to get across.

Reviewer 3: +1 I agree with Moe on this. I like the nudge to the other intros, but I think we could frame it less as "If you have experience..." and more as "If you intend to develop for web/backend..."

Author: Definitely agreed here -- rephrased this.

Many, but not all, of these challenge arise due to particularities of
the mobile environment, including network reliability, local storage,
and keeping UIs reactive (up-to-date as underlying data changes).
:term:`Realm Database` provides solutions to all of these problems.

- **Network reliability**: Realm Database is offline-first: you always
  read from and write to the local database, not over the network.
  When :term:`Realm sync` is enabled, Realm Database synchronizes
  data with MongoDB Realm over the network in a background thread,
  pushing local data changes to MongoDB Realm and pulling remote changes
  down. The :term:`Realm sync protocol` resolves conflicts
  consistently on each client and in the
  :term:`linked MongoDB Atlas cluster <linked cluster>`.

- **Local storage**: Realm Database stores data as objects using the native
  query language for each platform, to make storing, accessing, and
  updating your data simple.

- **Reactive UI**:
  :term:`Live objects <live objects>` always reflect the latest data
  stored in Realm Database and allow you to subscribe to changes, so
  you can keep your UI up-to-date at all times.

MongoDB Atlas
-------------

> Client applications generate a lot of data. Whether it's uploaded photos

Reviewer 3: +1 we should definitely not position files/photos (i.e. GridFS) as a major feature, especially since I don't think Stitch even supports GridFS commands. Can we de-emphasize this or maybe remove it entirely?

and files, posts and comments on a blog, or inventory volumes in a
kitchen, you need to store that data somewhere. MongoDB Atlas provides

> cloud-hosted managed instances of MongoDB that are always available. And

Reviewer 2: This might be better phrased without starting the sentence with "And because".

Perhaps the alternative:

"MongoDB Atlas provides cloud-hosted managed instances of MongoDB that are always available. In addition, Atlas is flexible and supports a wide range of languages for your backend number-crunching services."

This also sounds a bit less sales-pitchy than "because it's MongoDB it does X"

Author: This has definitely been one of the areas I've found most difficult to justify -- because we enforce schemas/kind of push people to access data through Realm Database, what *is* the sell for the Atlas connection? I hate how sales-pitchy it sounds so good call, rephrasing this.

Reviewer 3: I'd confirm this with Drew/Katherine to make sure it aligns with our marketing narrative, but broadly:

- Atlas lets you run aggregations and other complex workloads with the full capabilities of MongoDB
- Atlas makes your data accessible in environments that don't support Realm Database (i.e. web)
- Atlas makes your data available to visualize in Charts

because it's MongoDB, it's flexible and supports a wide range of
languages for your backend number-crunching services.

MongoDB Realm
-------------

> MongoDB Realm stitches together Realm Database and MongoDB Atlas in a

Reviewer 2: `MongoDB Realm "stitches" together ... `

haha neat pun :pundog:

single backend service. MongoDB also provides several common service
components in addition to Realm Database and MongoDB Atlas:

> - :ref:`Realm functions <functions>`, server-side logic for

Reviewer 2: I largely love the use of simple language in this sentence.

The one thing that might be confusing is the term "traditional service". What is a traditional service? Could we clarify this or replace the term?

Author: Ditching the "traditional service" label.

  your :term:`Realm app`. Similar to a REST API for a traditional
  service, except instead of manually constructing a call to an HTTP
  endpoint, you call Realm functions from a Realm SDK.

- :ref:`Realm triggers <triggers>`, which let you execute a function
  when an event occurs, or at a scheduled time.

- :ref:`Users and Authentication <users-and-authentication>`, built-in
  user management with easy integration into
  :ref:`third-party authentication providers <auth-providers>`,
  like :ref:`Facebook <facebook-authentication>`,
  :ref:`Google <google-authentication>`, and
  :ref:`Apple <apple-id-authentication>`.

- Permissioning via :term:`Realm rules` gives you fine-grained control
  over who accesses what data.

- Server-side :ref:`Realm values and Realm secrets <values-and-secrets>`
  let you set global variables and private credentials so you can define
  once, use anywhere.

- Access your data in MongoDB Realm using :ref:`GraphQL <graphql-api>`

>   from the web or any Realm client.

Reviewer 3: Can we make the phrasing in these bullets more consistent? Some of them read like a key-value list (e.g. Realm functions, server-side logic...), others read more as proper sentences (e.g. Realm triggers, which let you...), and others use verb phrases (e.g. "Access your data...")

> The Realm SDK lets you call functions, authenticate users, sync

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Realm Mobile SDKs lets you call functions, authenticate users, sync
```

Thoughts on this phrasing? We definitely should pluralize SDKs if nothing else.

:term:`Realm Database` solves many common mobile programming headaches:

- **Network reliability**: Realm Database is offline-first: you always
  read from and write to the local database, not over the network.
  When :term:`Realm sync` is enabled, Realm Database synchronizes
  data with MongoDB Realm over the network in a background thread,
  pushing local data changes to MongoDB Realm and pulling remote changes
  down. The :term:`Realm sync protocol` resolves conflicts
  consistently on each client and in the
  :term:`linked MongoDB Atlas cluster <linked cluster>`.

- **Local storage**: Realm Database runs right on client devices, just
  like SQLite. Access data using the native query language for each
  platform, so storing, accessing, and updating your data is simple.

- **Reactive UI**: :term:`Live objects <live objects>` always reflect
  the latest data stored in Realm Database and allow you to subscribe to
  changes, so you can keep your UI up-to-date at all times.

MongoDB Atlas
-------------

Client applications generate a lot of data. Whether it's uploaded
reviews and ratings, posts and comments on a blog, or inventory

> in a kitchen, you need to store that data somewhere. MongoDB Atlas

Reviewer 3: Let's link to Atlas

https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas

provides cloud-hosted managed instances of MongoDB that are always
available.

Atlas supports aggregations and other complex workloads with the full
capabilities of MongoDB. You can connect to your Atlas instance in your
backend services using MongoDB drivers for a wide range of languages. Or

> connect your Atlas instance to MongoDB Charts to visualize your data in

Reviewer 3: Let's link to charts

https://www.mongodb.com/products/charts

real time.

MongoDB Realm
-------------

MongoDB Realm stitches together Realm Database and MongoDB Atlas in a
single backend service. To support these services, MongoDB Realm also
provides components to fulfill several common application requirements:

- :ref:`Realm functions <functions>` provide server-side logic for
  your :term:`Realm app`. Similar to endpoints in a REST API, except
  instead of manually constructing the URL, headers, body, and method
  for a call to an HTTP endpoint, you call Realm functions from a module
  of the Realm SDK in your client application.

> - :ref:`Realm triggers <triggers>` automatically

Reviewer 2: Since we have a parenthesis that further explains what event triggers is, the sentence might read better if you flipped it:

"Realm triggers automatically execute a function at a scheduled time or when an event occurs (such as a change to a database or a call to a HTTP endpoint)." 

This way the reader doesn't get lost in the sentence.

Author: Great suggestion! I've also converted the parens into an aside to improve the flow.

  as a change to a database or a call to a HTTP endpoint.

- :ref:`Realm Users and Authentication <users-and-authentication>`
  provide built-in user management with easy integration into
  :ref:`third-party authentication providers <auth-providers>`,
  like :ref:`Facebook <facebook-authentication>`,
  :ref:`Google <google-authentication>`, and
  :ref:`Apple <apple-id-authentication>`.

- :term:`Realm rules` let you control who accesses what data.

- Server-side :ref:`Realm values and Realm secrets <values-and-secrets>`
  enable you to define global variables and private credentials once and
  use them across your entire Realm app.

- Use the :ref:`GraphQL API <graphql-api>` to access data stored in a
  linked MongoDB cluster using any standard GraphQL client.

The Realm Mobile SDKs let you can call functions, authenticate users,
sync remote Realms, and query your local Realms.

Summary
-------

- MongoDB Realm is a Backend-as-a-Service (BaaS) that takes care of the
  details of deployment and scaling for you. You can customize your
  Realm app with custom logic via functions and triggers, custom
  permissions via rules, and authentication via third-party SSO.

> - Realm Database is an mobile object database in which you can directly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Realm Database is an offline-first mobile object database in which you can directly
```

  access and store live objects without an :wikipedia:`ORM
  </Object-relational_mapping>`.

- Live Objects and Realm Sync offer significant benefits
  over traditional mobile development stacks:

  - Live Objects always reflect the latest state of data in the database,
    making it easier to keep your UI in sync with changes to your data,
    regardless of where those changes come from.

  - Realm Sync synchronizes data between client-side Realm

>     Databases and the server-side MongoDB Atlas cluster linked to your

Reviewer 3: Realm Databases -> Realms?

    Realm app. The Realm sync protocol resolves conflicts consistently

>     across the server and all client instances of a Realm.

Reviewer 3: how about:

... consistently across all instances of a Realm both on the server and in client applications.
